# Epoch Based Document ID
## Concept
Engineering documents and artifacts are typically controlled using reference IDs such as drawing numbers, part numbers, and serial numbers. Non-significant ID's are typically recorded sequentially with their use noted in a central register. A method and reference implementation is presented here for generating engineering ID's that are unique without requiring a central registry to maintain cognizance of which ID's have been issued and which are available. 

The method uses a central issuing authority to generate an ID that is composed of two parts: an encoded time stamp, and a check digit. Their concatination produces the final ID

### Time stamp
The bulk of the ID string is generated by counting the number of time intervals since a particular epoch. In the accompanying reference implementation, the epoch is given as February 13th, 2025 at midnight UTC. 

#### Time Intervals
The choice of time intervals is largely subject to human factors. Research has indicated that drawing and part numbers should generally be no longer than 7 to 9 characters long in order to reduce human error during recall and transcription. 

Encoding will be discussed in the next section, however take it as a given that we will encode the time stamp in base 34. If we assume that one digit is reserved as a check digit, the table below shows how long it will take for the ID's to overflow depending on the time interval. 

| Time Interval | 7 Digit | 8 Digit | 9 Digit |
| ------------- | ------- | ------- | ------- |
| 0.001 Sec | 0.049 yrs | 1.66 yrs | 56 yrs |
| 0.01 Sec | 0.49 yrs | 16.6 yrs | 566 yrs |
| 0.1 Sec | 4.9 yrs | 166 yrs | 5662 yrs| 

This is calculated using the formula\
\
$$t_{overflow}=\frac{34^{n_{length}-1}}{\frac{1}{t_{interval}} * 31,536,000}$$

Individuals and organizations may utilize various configurations as they find useful. The reference implementation uses 0.01 second intervals. Nine digit numbers are already in common use in the engineering industry, and the balance of response time and service time seem reasonable to the author for most purposes. 

#### Base 34 Encoding
To form the time stamp element of the ID, the number of time intervals since the epoch at time of ID generation is encoded into base 34. The purpose of encoding the timestamp is for minimizing ID character length. This encoding utilizes the numbers 0 through 9, and latin characters A through Z with the exception of I and O. These letters are dropped as they can easily be confused with the numbers 1 and 0 on engineering documentation that often uses uppercase, sans serif typefaces. 
